#### CHAPTER-

### Forms	of	Energy	Storage

Energy	storage	is	the	capture	of	energy	produced	at	one	time	for	use	at
a	later	time.	A	device	that	stores	energy	is	generally	called	an
accumulator	or	battery.	Energy	comes	in	multiple	forms	including
radiation,	chemical,	gravitational	potential,	electrical	potential,
electricity,	elevated	temperature,	latent	heat	and	kinetic.	Energy
storage	involves	converting	energy	from	forms	that	are	difficult	to	store
to	more	conveniently	or	economically	storable	forms.

Some	technologies	provide	short-term	energy	storage,	while	others	can
endure	for	much	longer.	Bulk	energy	storage	is	currently	dominated	by
hydroelectric	dams,	both	conventional	as	well	as	pumped.

Common	examples	of	energy	storage	are	the	rechargeable	battery,
which	stores	chemical	energy	readily	convertible	to	electricity	to
operate	a	mobile	phone,	the	hydroelectric	dam,	which	stores	energy	in	a
reservoir	as	gravitational	potential	energy,	and	ice	storage	tanks,	which
store	ice	frozen	by	cheaper	energy	at	night	to	meet	peak	daytime
demand	for	cooling.	Fossil	fuels	such	as	coal	and	gasoline	store	ancient
energy	derived	from	sunlight	by	organisms	that	later	died,	became
buried	and	over	time	were	then	converted	into	these	fuels.	Food	(which
is	made	by	the	same	process	as	fossil	fuels)	is	a	form	of	energy	stored	in
chemical	form.


### Hybrid	Vehicles

A	hybrid	vehicle	uses	two	or	more	distinct	types	of	power,	such	as
internal	combustion	engine	to	drive	an	electric	generator	that	powers
an	electric	motor	e.g.	in	diesel-electric	trains	using	diesel	engines	to
drive	an	electric	generator	that	powers	an	electric	motor,	and
submarines	that	use	diesels	when	surfaced	and	batteries	when
submerged.	Other	means	to	store	energy	include	pressurized	fluid	in
hydraulic	hybrids.

The	basic	principle	with	hybrid	vehicles	is	that	the	different	motors
work	better	at	different	speeds;	the	electric	motor	is	more	efficient	at
producing	torque,	or	turning	power,	and	the	combustion	engine	is
better	for	maintaining	high	speed	(better	than	typical	electric	motor).
Switching	from	one	to	the	other	at	the	proper	time	while	speeding	up
yields	a	win-win	in	terms	of	energy	efficiency,	as	such	that	translates
into	greater	fuel	efficiency,	for	example

```
Mopeds,	electric	bicycles,	and	even	electric	kick	scooters	are	a
simple	form	of	a	hybrid,	powered	by	an	internal	combustion
engine	or	electric	motor	and	the	rider’s	muscles.	Early	prototype
motorcycles	in	the	late	19th	century	used	the	same	principle.
In	a	 parallel	hybrid	bicycle human	and	motor	torques
are	mechanically	coupled	at	the	pedal	or	one	of	the
wheels,	e.g.	using	a	hub	motor,	a	roller	pressing	onto	a
tire,	or	a	connection	to	a	wheel	using	a	transmission
element.	Most	motorized	bicycles,	mopeds	are	of	this
```

```
type.
In	a	 series	hybrid	bicycle	(SHB) (a	kind	of	chainless
bicycle)	the	user	pedals	a	generator,	charging	a	battery
or	feeding	the	motor,	which	delivers	all	of	the	torque
required.	They	are	commercially	available,	being	simple
in	theory	and	manufacturing.
Hybrid	power	trains	use	diesel-electric	or	turbo-electric	to
power	railway	locomotives,	buses,	heavy	goods	vehicles,	mobile
hydraulic	machinery,	and	ships.
```
## Advantages	of	Hybrid	Vechile

**1.	Environmentally	Friendly:** One	of	the	biggest	advantage	of	hybrid
car	over	gasoline	powered	car	is	that	it	runs	cleaner	and	has	better	gas
mileage	which	makes	it	environmentally	friendly.	A	hybrid	vehicle	runs
on	twin	powered	engine	(gasoline	engine	and	electric	motor)	that	cuts
fuel	consumption	and	conserves	energy.
**2.	Financial	Benefits:** Hybrid	cars	are	supported	by	many	credits	and
incentives	that	help	to	make	them	affordable.	Lower	annual	tax	bills	and
exemption	from	congestion	charges	comes	in	the	form	of	less	amount	of
money	spent	on	the	fuel.
**3.	Less	dependence	on	Fossil	Fuels:** A	Hybrid	car	is	much	cleaner
and	requires	less	fuel	to	run	which	means	less	emissions	and	less
dependence	on	fossil	fuels.	This	in	turn	also	helps	to	reduce	the	price	of
gasoline	in	domestic	market.


**4.	Regenerative	Braking	System:** Each	time	you	apply	brake	while
driving	a	hybrid	vehicle	helps	you	to	recharge	your	battery	a	little.	An
internal	mechanism	kicks	in	that	captures	the	energy	released	and	uses
it	to	charge	the	battery	which	in	turn	eliminates	the	amount	of	time	and
need	for	stopping	to	recharge	the	battery	periodically.
**5.	Built	From	Light	Materials:** Hybrid	vehicles	are	made	up	of	lighter
materials	which	means	less	energy	is	required	to	run.	The	engine	is	also
smaller	and	lighter	which	also	saves	much	energy.
**6.	Higher	Resale	Value:** With	continuous	increase	in	price	of	gasoline,
more	and	more	people	are	turning	towards	hybrid	cars.	The	result	is
that	these	green	vehicles	have	started	commanding	higher	than	average
resale	values.	So,	in	case	you	are	not	satisfied	with	your	vehicle,	you
can	always	sell	it	at	a	premium	price	to	buyers	looking	for	it.

## Disadvantages	of	Hybrid	vechile

**1.	Less	Power:** Hybrid	cars	are	twin	powered	engine.	The	gasoline
engine	which	is	primary	source	of	power	is	much	smaller	as	compared
to	what	you	get	in	single	engine	powered	car	and	electric	motor	is	low
power.	The	combined	power	of	both	is	often	less	than	that	of	gas
powered	engine.	It	is	therefore	suited	for	city	driving	and	not	for	speed
and	acceleration.
**2.	Can	be	Expensive:** The	biggest	drawback	of	having	a	hybrid	car	is
that	it	can	burn	a	hole	in	your	pocket.	Hybrid	cars	are	comparatively


expensive	than	a	regular	petrol	car	and	can	cost	$5000	to	$10000	more
than	a	standard	version.	However,	that	extra	amount	can	be	offset	with
lower	running	cost	and	tax	exemptions.

**3.	Poorer	Handling:** A	hybrid	car	houses	an	gasoline	powered	engine,
a	lighter	electric	engine	and	a	pack	of	powerful	batteries.	This	adds
weight	and	eats	up	the	extra	space	in	the	car.	Extra	weight	results	in
fuel	inefficiency	and	manufacturers	cut	down	weight	which	has	resulted
in	motor	and	battery	downsizing	and	less	support	in	the	suspension	and
body.
**4.	Higher	Maintenance	Costs:** The	presence	of	dual	engine,
continuous	improvement	in	technology,	and	higher	maintenance	cost
can	make	it	difficult	for	mechanics	to	repair	the	car.	It	is	also	difficult	to
find	a	mechanic	with	such	an	expertise.
**5.	Presence	of	High	Voltage	in	Batteries:** In	case	of	an	accident,	the
high	voltage	present	inside	the	batteries	can	prove	lethal	for	you.	There
is	a	high	chance	of	you	getting	electrocuted	in	such	cases	which	can
also	make	the	task	difficult	for	rescuers	to	get	other	passengers	and
driver	out	of	the	car.

### Smart	Grid	System

Nowadays,	the	electric	power	system	is	facing	a	radical	transformation
in	worldwide	with	the	decarbonise	electricity	supply	to	replace	aging
assets	and	control	the	natural	resources	with	new	information	and


communication	technologies	(ICT).	A	smart	grid	technology	is	an
essential	to	provide	easy	integration	and	reliable	service	to	the
consumers.

**A	smart	grid	system	is	a	self-sufficient	electricity	network	system
based	on	digital	automation	technology	for	monitoring,	control,
and	analysis	within	the	supply	chain.	This	system	can	find	the
solution	to	the	problems	very	quickly	in	an	existed	system	that
can	reduce	the	workforce	and	it	will	targets	sustainable,	reliable,
safe	and	quality	electricity	to	all	consumers.**

### Smart	Grid	Components

To	achieve	a	modernized	smart	grid,	a	wide	range	of	technologies
should	be	developed	and	must	be	implemented.	These	technologies
generally	grouped	into	following	key	technology	areas	as	discussed
below.


**Intelligent	Appliances:** Intelligent	appliances	have	capable	of
deciding	when	to	consume	energy	based	on	customer	pre-set
preferences.	This	can	lead	to	going	away	along	toward	reducing
peak	loads	which	have	an	impact	on	electricity	generation	costs.
For	example,	smart	sensors,	like	temperature	sensor	which	is
used	in	thermal	stations	to	control	the	boiler	temperature	based
on	predefined	temperature	levels.

**Smart	Power	Meters:** The	smart	meters	provide	two-way
communication	between	power	providers	and	the	end	user
consumers	to	automate	billing	data	collections,	detect	device
failures	and	dispatch	repair	crews	to	the	exact	location	much
faster.

**Smart	Substations:** substations	are	included	monitoring	and
control	non-critical	and	critical	operational	data	such	as	power
status,	power	factor	performance,	breaker,	security,	transformer
status,	etc.	substations	are	used	to	transform	voltage	at	several
times	in	many	locations,	that	providing	safe	and	reliable	delivery
of	energy.	Smart	substations	are	also	necessary	for	splitting	the
path	of	electricity	flow	into	many	directions.	Substations	require
large	and	very	expensive	equipment	to	operate,	including
transformers,	switches,	capacitor	banks,	circuit	breakers,	a
network	protected	relays	and	several	others.

**Super	Conducting	Cables:** These	are	used	to	provide	long
distance	power	transmission,	and	automated	monitoring	and


```
analysis	tools	capable	of	detecting	faults	itself	or	even
predicting	cable	and	failures	based	on	real-time	data	weather,
and	the	outage	history.
```
```
Integrated	communications: The	key	to	a	smart	grid
technology	is	integrated	communications.	It	must	be	as	fast	as
enough	to	real-time	needs	of	the	system.	Depending	upon	the
need,	Many	different	technologies	are	used	in	smart	grid
communication	like	Programmable	Logic	Controller	(PLC),
wireless,	cellular,	SCADA	(Supervisory	Control	and	Data
Acquisition),	and	BPL.Key	Considerations	for	Integrated
Communication.
```
### Key	Considerations	for	Integrated

### Communication

**Ease	of	deployment
Standards
Data	carrying	capacity
Secure
Network	coverage	capability**

### Benefits	of	Smart	Grid

```
Integrate	isolated	technologies:	smart	grid	enables	better
energy	management
Protective	management	of	electrical	network	during	emergency
```

```
situation
Better	demand,	supply/	demand	response
Better	power	quality
Reduce	carbon	emissions
Increased	demand	for	energy:	Requires	more	complex	and
critical	solutions	with	better	energy	management
Renewables	Integration
```
# Further	Reading

## The	Smart	Grid

Maybe	you	have	heard	of	the	Smart	Grid	on	the	news	or	from	your
energy	provider.	But	not	everyone	knows	what	the	grid	is,	let	alone	the
Smart	Grid.	“The	grid,”	refers	to	the	electric	grid,	a	network	of
transmission	lines,	substations,	transformers	and	more	that	deliver
electricity	from	the	power	plant	to	your	home	or	business.	It’s	what	you
plug	into	when	you	flip	on	your	light	switch	or	power	up	your	computer.
Our	current	electric	grid	was	built	in	the	1890s	and	improved	upon	as
technology	advanced	through	each	decade.	Today,	it	consists	of	more
than	9,200	electric	generating	units	with	more	than	1	million
megawatts	of	generating	capacity	connected	to	more	than	300,
miles	of	transmission	lines.	Although	the	electric	grid	is	considered	an
engineering	marvel,	we	are	stretching	its	patchwork	nature	to	its
capacity.	To	move	forward,	we	need	a	new	kind	of	electric	grid,	one	that
is	built	from	the	bottom	up	to	handle	the	groundswell	of	digital	and
computerized	equipment	and	technology	dependent	on	it—and	one	that
can	automate	and	manage	the	increasing	complexity	and	needs	of


electricity	in	the	21st	Century.

## What	Makes	a	Grid	“Smart?”

In	short,	the	digital	technology	that	allows	for	two-way	communication
between	the	utility	and	its	customers,	and	the	sensing	along	the
transmission	lines	is	what	makes	the	grid	smart.	Like	the	Internet,	the
Smart	Grid	will	consist	of	controls,	computers,	automation,	and	new
technologies	and	equipment	working	together,	but	in	this	case,	these
technologies	will	work	with	the	electrical	grid	to	respond	digitally	to	our
quickly	changing	electric	demand.

## What	does	a	Smart	Grid	do?

The	Smart	Grid	represents	an	unprecedented	opportunity	to	move	the
energy	industry	into	a	new	era	of	reliability,	availability,	and	efficiency
that	will	contribute	to	our	economic	and	environmental	health.	During
the	transition	period,	it	will	be	critical	to	carry	out	testing,	technology
improvements,	consumer	education,	development	of	standards	and
regulations,	and	information	sharing	between	projects	to	ensure	that
the	benefits	we	envision	from	the	Smart	Grid	become	a	reality.	The
benefits	associated	with	the	Smart	Grid	include:

**More	efficient	transmission	of	electricity**

**Quicker	restoration	of	electricity	after	power	disturbances**


**Reduced	operations	and	management	costs	for	utilities,	and
ultimately	lower	power	costs	for	consumers**

**Reduced	peak	demand,	which	will	also	help	lower	electricity
rates**

**Increased	integration	of	large-scale	renewable	energy	systems**

**Better	integration	of	customer-owner	power	generation	systems,
including	renewable	energy	systems**

**Improved	security**

Today,	an	electricity	disruption	such	as	a	blackout	can	have	a	domino
effect—a	series	of	failures	that	can	affect	banking,	communications,
traffic,	and	security.	This	is	a	particular	threat	in	the	winter,	when
homeowners	can	be	left	without	heat.	A	smarter	grid	will	add	resiliency
to	our	electric	power	System	and	make	it	better	prepared	to	address
emergencies	such	as	severe	storms,	earthquakes,	large	solar	flares,	and
terrorist	attacks.	Because	of	its	two-way	interactive	capacity,	the	Smart
Grid	will	allow	for	automatic	rerouting	when	equipment	fails	or	outages
occur.	This	will	minimize	outages	and	minimize	the	effects	when	they	do
happen.	When	a	power	outage	occurs,	Smart	Grid	technologies	will
detect	and	isolate	the	outages,	containing	them	before	they	become
large-scale	blackouts.	The	new	technologies	will	also	help	ensure	that
electricity	recovery	resumes	quickly	and	strategically	after	an
emergency—routing	electricity	to	emergency	services	first,	for	example.


In	addition,	the	Smart	Grid	will	take	greater	advantage	of	customer-
owned	power	generators	to	produce	power	when	it	is	not	available	from
utilities.	By	combining	these	“distributed	generation”	resources,	a
community	could	keep	its	health	center,	police	department,	traffic
lights,	phone	System,	and	grocery	store	operating	during	emergencies.
In	addition,	the	Smart	Grid	is	a	way	to	address	an	aging	energy
infrastructure	that	needs	to	be	upgraded	or	replaced.	It’s	a	way	to
address	energy	efficiency,	to	bring	increased	awareness	to	consumers
about	the	connection	between	electricity	use	and	the	environment.	And
it’s	a	way	to	bring	increased	national	security	to	our	energy	System—
drawing	on	greater	amounts	of	home-grown	electricity	that	is	more
resistant	to	natural	disasters	and	attack.

### Giving	Consumers	Control

The	Smart	Grid	is	not	just	about	utilities	and	technologies;	it	is	about
giving	you	the	information	and	tools	you	need	to	make	choices	about
your	energy	use.	If	you	already	manage	activities	such	as	personal
banking	from	your	home	computer,	imagine	managing	your	electricity	in
a	similar	way.	A	smarter	grid	will	enable	an	unprecedented	level	of
consumer	participation.	For	example,	you	will	no	longer	have	to	wait	for
your	monthly	statement	to	know	how	much	electricity	you	use.	With	a
smarter	grid,	you	can	have	a	clear	and	timely	picture	of	it.	“Smart
meters,”	and	other	mechanisms,	will	allow	you	to	see	how	much
electricity	you	use,	when	you	use	it,	and	its	cost.	Combined	with	real-
time	pricing,	this	will	allow	you	to	save	money	by	using	less	power	when
electricity	is	most	expensive.	While	the	potential	benefits	of	the	Smart
Grid	are	usually	discussed	in	terms	of	economics,	national	security,	and


renewable	energy	goals,	the	Smart	Grid	has	the	potential	to	help	you
save	money	by	helping	you	to	manage	your	electricity	use	and	choose
the	best	times	to	purchase	electricity.	And	you	can	save	even	more	by
generating	your	own	power.

### Building	and	Testing	the	Smart	Grid

The	Smart	Grid	will	consist	of	millions	of	pieces	and	parts—controls,
computers,	power	lines,	and	new	technologies	and	equipment.	It	will
take	some	time	for	all	the	technologies	to	be	perfected,	equipment
installed,	and	systems	tested	before	it	comes	fully	on	line.	And	it	won’t
happen	all	at	once—the	Smart	Grid	is	evolving,	piece	by	piece,	over	the
next	decade	or	so.	Once	mature,	the	Smart	Grid	will	likely	bring	the
same	kind	of	transformation	that	the	Internet	has	already	brought	to	the
way	we	live,	work,	play,	and	learn.

### Super	Capicators

Supercapacitors,	which	are	often	called	electrical	double-layer
capacitors	(EDLCs),	pseudocapacitors,	ultracapacitors,	power
capacitors,	gold	capacitors,	or	power	caches,	have	attracted	research
interest	worldwide	because	of	their	potential	applications	as	energy
storage	devices	in	many	fields.	Supercapacitors	have	considerably
higher	specific	powers	and	longer	cycle	lifetimes	compared	to	most
rechargeable	batteries,	such	as	lead-acid,	nickel-metal	hydride,	and	Li-
ion	batteries.	Hence,	supercapacitors	have	attracted	considerable
interest	because	of	the	ever-increasing	demands	of	electric	vehicles,
portable	electronic	devices,	and	power	sources	for	memory	backup.


They	typically	store	10	to	100	times	more	energy	per	unit	volume	or
mass	than	electrolytic	capacitors,	can	accept	and	deliver	charge	much
faster	than	batteries,	and	tolerate	many	more	charge	and	discharge
cycles	than	rechargeable	batteries.

Supercapacitors	are	used	in	applications	requiring	many	rapid
charge/discharge	cycles	rather	than	long	term	compact	energy	storage:
within	cars,	buses,	trains,	cranes	and	elevators,	where	they	are	used	for
regenerative	braking,	short-term	energy	storage	or	burst-mode	power
delivery.	Smaller	units	are	used	as	memory	backup	for	static	random-
access	memory	(SRAM).

Unlike	ordinary	capacitors,	supercapacitors	do	not	use	the	conventional
solid	dielectric,	but	rather,	they	use	electrostatic	double-layer
capacitance	and	electrochemical	pseudocapacitance,[4]	both	of	which
contribute	to	the	total	capacitance	of	the	capacitor,	with	a	few
differences:

```
Electrostatic	double-layer	capacitors	(EDLCs) use	carbon
electrodes	or	derivatives	with	much	higher	electrostatic	double-
layer	capacitance	than	electrochemical	pseudocapacitance,
achieving	separation	of	charge	in	a	Helmholtz	double	layer	at
the	interface	between	the	surface	of	a	conductive	electrode	and
an	electrolyte.	The	separation	of	charge	is	of	the	order	of	a	few
ångströms	(0.3–0.8	nm),	much	smaller	than	in	a	conventional
capacitor.
Electrochemical	pseudocapacitors use	metal	oxide	or
```

```
conducting	polymer	electrodes	with	a	high	amount	of
electrochemical	pseudocapacitance	additional	to	the	double-
layer	capacitance.	Pseudocapacitance	is	achieved	by	Faradaic
electron	charge-transfer	with	redox	reactions,	intercalation	or
electrosorption.
Hybrid	capacitors ,	such	as	the	lithium-ion	capacitor,	use
electrodes	with	differing	characteristics:	one	exhibiting	mostly
electrostatic	capacitance	and	the	other	mostly	electrochemical
capacitance.
```
The	electrolyte	forms	an	ionic	conductive	connection	between	the	two
electrodes	which	distinguishes	them	from	conventional	electrolytic
capacitors	where	a	dielectric	layer	always	exists,	and	the	so-called
electrolyte	(e.g.,	MnO2	or	conducting	polymer)	is	in	fact	part	of	the
second	electrode	(the	cathode,	or	more	correctly	the	positive	electrode).
Supercapacitors	are	polarized	by	design	with	asymmetric	electrodes,	or,
for	symmetric	electrodes,	by	a	potential	applied	during	manufacture.


### Basic	Design

Electrochemical	capacitors	(supercapacitors)	consist	of	two	electrodes
separated	by	an	ion-permeable	membrane	(separator),	and	an
electrolyte	ionically	connecting	both	electrodes.	When	the	electrodes
are	polarized	by	an	applied	voltage,	ions	in	the	electrolyte	form	electric
double	layers	of	opposite	polarity	to	the	electrode’s	polarity.	For
example,	positively	polarized	electrodes	will	have	a	layer	of	negative
ions	at	the	electrode/electrolyte	interface	along	with	a	charge-balancing
layer	of	positive	ions	adsorbing	onto	the	negative	layer.	The	opposite	is
true	for	the	negatively	polarized	electrode.


Additionally,	depending	on	electrode	material	and	surface	shape,	some
ions	may	permeate	the	double	layer	becoming	specifically	adsorbed	ions
and	contribute	with	pseudocapacitance	to	the	total	capacitance	of	the
supercapacitor

### Capacitance	distribution

The	two	electrodes	form	a	series	circuit	of	two	individual	capacitors	C
and	C2.	The	total	capacitance	Ctotal	is	given	by	the	formula

Ctotal	=	C1*C2/(C1+C2)

Supercapacitors	may	have	either	symmetric	or	asymmetric	electrodes.
Symmetry	implies	that	both	electrodes	have	the	same	capacitance
value,	yielding	a	total	capacitance	of	half	the	value	of	each	single
electrode	(if	C1	=	C2,	then	Ctotal	=	½	C1).	For	asymmetric	capacitors,
the	total	capacitance	can	be	taken	as	that	of	the	electrode	with	the
smaller	capacitance	(if	C1	>>	C2,	then	Ctotal	≈	C2).

### Storage	principles

Electrochemical	capacitors	use	the	double-layer	effect	to	store	electric
energy;	however,	this	double-layer	has	no	conventional	solid	dielectric
to	separate	the	charges.	There	are	two	storage	principles	in	the	electric
double-layer	of	the	electrodes	that	contribute	to	the	total	capacitance	of
an	electrochemical	capacitor


Double-layer	capacitance,	electrostatic	storage	of	the	electrical	energy
achieved	by	separation	of	charge	in	a	Helmholtz	double	layer.
Pseudocapacitance,	electrochemical	storage	of	the	electrical	energy
achieved	by	faradaic	redox	reactions	with	charge-transfer.
Both	capacitances	are	only	separable	by	measurement	techniques.	The
amount	of	charge	stored	per	unit	voltage	in	an	electrochemical
capacitor	is	primarily	a	function	of	the	electrode	size,	although	the
amount	of	capacitance	of	each	storage	principle	can	vary	extremely.

Practically,	these	storage	principles	yield	a	capacitor	with	a	capacitance
value	in	the	order	of	1	to	100	farad.

Typical	construction	of	a	supercapacitor:	(1)	power	source,	(2)	collector,
(3)	polarized	electrode,	(4)	Helmholtz	double	layer,	(5)	electrolyte


having	positive	and	negative	ions,	(6)	separator.

### Comparision	Chart



